## .NET

The .NET framework is a software platform for building web applications and services for the Windows, iOS, and Linux operating systems, as well as WinForms and WPF applications on Windows operating systems.

### Characteristics

#### Open source

.NET is an open-source platform supported by the .NET Foundation, Microsoft and the .NET community.

#### Support for multiple programming languages

At the heart of the platform is the virtual machine component named Common Language Runtime (CLR), which enables .NET to support multiple languages. The key languages for .NET are C#, Visual Basic and F#. Code written in any of these languages is compiled into a Common Intermediate Language (CIL) assembly, a sort of .NET assembler.

#### Common runtime engine

.NET has a common runtime engine shared by all .NET languages. One aspect of this engine is a well-defined set of types that each .NET language understands.

#### Language integration

.NET supports cross-language inheritance, cross-language exception handling, and cross-language debugging of code. For example, you can define a base class in C# and extend this type in Visual Basic.

#### Cross-platform

.NET has evolved as a platform for Windows, Linux and macOS.

#### Powerful class libraries

In .NET, there are multiple class libraries that are functional, useful components that can be reused across various applications. They allow you to build code libraries, simple terminal applications, graphical desktop applications, and enterprise-level websites.

#### Extensive command-line support

The .NET command-line interface (CLI) is a cross- platform tool chain for developing and packaging .NET applications. Additional tools can be installed (globally or locally) beyond the standard tools that ship with the .NET SDK.

### Building blocks

From a programmer’s point of view, .NET can be understood as a **runtime environment** and a **comprehensive base class library**. The runtime layer contains the set of minimal implementations that are tied specifically to a platform (Windows, iOS, Linux) and architecture (x86, x64, ARM), as well as all of the base types for .NET.

Another building block of the .NET platform is the **Common Type System**, or CTS. The CTS specification fully describes all possible data types and all programming constructs supported by the runtime, specifies how these entities can interact with each other, and details how they are represented in the .NET metadata format.

However, a given .NET language **might not support every feature defined by the CTS**. The **Common Language Specification**, or CLS, is a related specification that defines a subset of common types and programming constructs that all .NET programming languages can agree on. Thus, if you build .NET types that expose only CLS-compliant features, you can rest assured that all .NET languages can consume them. Conversely, if you make use of a data type or programming construct that is outside of the bounds of the CLS, you cannot guarantee that every .NET programming language can interact with your .NET code library.

### Intermediate Language (IL)

The C# compiler (named Roslyn) used by the .NET CLI tool converts your C# source code into intermediate language (IL) code and stores the IL in an assembly (a DLL or EXE file). IL is also known as Microsoft Intermediate Language (MSIL) or Common Intermediate Langauge (CIL). IL code statements are like assembly language instructions, which are executed by .NET’s virtual machine, known as CoreCLR.

At runtime, CoreCLR loads the IL code from the assembly, the just-in-time (JIT) compiler compiles it into native CPU instructions, and then it is executed by the CPU on your machine.

The benefit of this two-step compilation process is that Microsoft can create CLRs for Linux and macOS, as well as for Windows. The same IL code runs everywhere because of the second compilation step, which generates code for the native operating system and CPU instruction set.

Regardless of which language the source code is written in, for example, C#, Visual Basic, or F#, all .NET applications use IL code for their instructions stored in an assembly. Microsoft and others provide disassembler tools that can open an assembly and reveal this IL code, such as the ILSpy .NET Decompiler extension.

### JIT Compiler

The entity that compiles CIL code into meaningful CPU instructions is a JIT compiler (jitter). The .NET runtime environment leverages a JIT compiler for each CPU targeting the runtime, each optimized for the underlying platform.

For example, if you are building a .NET application to be deployed to iOS or Android, the jitter is equipped to run within a low-memory environment. If you are deploying the assembly to a server, the jitter will be optimized to function in a high-memory environment.

### Base Class Libraries (BCL)

The .NET platform also provides a set of BCLs that are available to all .NET programming languages. Not only does this base class library encapsulate various primitives such as threads, file input/output (I/O), graphical rendering systems, and interaction with various external hardware devices, but it also provides support for a number of services required by most real-world applications.

The base class libraries define types that can be used to build any type of software application and for components of the application to interact with each other.

## .NET technologies

In 2016, Microsoft officially launched .NET Core. However, with the release of .NET 5, the "Core" part of the name was dropped.

| Technology     | Description                                                                                                                                                        | Host OS                                    |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------ |
| Modern .NET    | A modern feature set, full C# 8 to 11 support, used to port existing apps or create new desktop, mobile, and web apps and services. Can target older .NET platform | Windows, macOS, Linux, Android, iOS, Tizen |
| .NET Framework | A legacy feature set, limited C# 8 support, no C# 9 to 11 support                                                                                                  | Windows                                    |
| Xamarin        | Mobile and desktop apps only                                                                                                                                       | Android, iOS, macOS                        |

## .NET Assemblies

Despite .NET binaries taking the same file extension as unmanaged Windows binaries (\*.dll), they have absolutely **no internal similarities**. .NET binaries do not contain platform-specific instructions but platform-agnostic Intermediate Language and type metadata.

When a binary has been created using a .NET compiler, the binary blob is termed an **assembly**. For .NET framework, the assemblies can either be a \*.dll or \*.exe, whereas for .NET, they are **always compiled with .dll extension**, even if the project is an executable.

Updated in .NET 6, your application can be reduced to a single file that is executed directly. It contains all the files needed to run, potentially even the .NET runtime itself. However, know that your code is still running in a managed container just as if it were published as multiple files.

An assembly contains CIL code (similar to Java bytecode), and is not compiled to platform-specific instructions until absolutely necessary i.e. referenced by .NET runtime. It also contains metadata (automatically generated by the language compiler) that describes in detail the characteristics of every "type" within the binary.

In addition to CIL and type metadata, assemblies themselves are also described using metadata termed **manifest**. The manifest contains information about the current version of the assembly, culture information, and a list of all externally referenced assemblies that are required for proper execution.

## .NET Standard

The number of base class libraries in the .NET Framework far exceeds those in .NET. This is understandable, as the .NET Framework had a 14-year head start on .NET. This disparity created issues when attempting to use .NET Framework code with .NET code. The solution (and requirement) for .NET Framework/.NET Core 3.1 interop is .NET Standard.

.NET Standard is a specification that defines the availability of .NET APIs and base class libraries that must be available in each implementation.

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/ standard/net-standard

## Top-level programs

If you had created the project with .NET SDK 5.0 or earlier, or if you had selected the check box labeled Do not use top-level statements, then the Program.cs file would have more statements.

During compilation with .NET SDK 6.0 or later, all the boilerplate code to define a namespace, the Program class, and its Main method, is generated and wrapped around the statements you write. This uses a feature introduced in .NET 5 called **top-level programs**.

```c#
// imports System namespace
// Not needed in .NET 6 or later
using System;
namespace HelloCS
{
    class Program
    {
        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
        Console.WriteLine("Hello, World!");
        }
    }
}
```
