## AWS S3

With AWS S3, you pay for what you use. You can choose a range of storage classes to selet a fit for your business and cost needs. When selecting a storage class, consider the following:

- How often you plan to retrieve your data
- How available you need your data to be

### Standard

- Designed for frequently used accessed data
- Stores data in a **minimum of three Availability Zones**

Provides high availability for objects. Makes a good choice for a wide range of use cases, including websites, content distribution, and data analytics.

### Standard-Infrequent Access (S3 Standard-IA)

- Ideal for infrequently accessed data
- Similar to Standard but has a lower storage price but higher retrieval price

### One Zone-Infrequent Access (S3 One Zone-IA)

Stores data in a single Availability Zone. Has a lower storage price than S3 Standard-IA. This makes a good storage class if:

- You want to save costs on storage
- You can easily reproduce your data in the event of an Availability Zone failure

### Intelligent-Tiering

- Ideal for data with unknown or changing access patterns
- Requires a small monthly monitoring and automation fee per object

In this storage class, S3 monitors objects' access patterns. For instance, if you have not acccessed an object for 30 consecutive days, S3 automatically moves it to the infrequent access tier (Standard-IA). If you access an object in the infrequent access tier, S3 automatically moves it back to the frequent access tier (Standard).

### Glacier Instant Retrieval

- Works well for archived data that requires immediate access
- Can retrieve objects within a few miliseconds

### Glacier Flexible Retrival

- Low-cost storage designed for data archiving
- Able to retrieve objects within a few minutes to hours

### Glacier Deep Archive

- Lowest-cost object storage class ideal for archiving
- Able to retrieve objects within 12 hours

### Outposts

- Creates S3 buckets on Amazon S3 Outposts
- Makes it easier to retrieve, store, and access data on AWS Outposts

AWS S3 Outposts delivers object storage to your on-premises AWS Outposts environment. It is a pool of AWS compute and storage capacity deployed at a customer site. AWS monitors, operates, and manages this capacity as part of an AWS Region.

It is designed to store data durably and redundantly across multiple devices and servers on your Outposts. It works well for workloads with local data residency requirements that must satisfy demanding performance needs by keeping data close to on-premise applications.
